# Agile Development Concepts

## Standards

ISO/IEC 12207 is the standard on software lifecycle processes.  this standard is well-thought-out and heavily scrutinized and potentially provided the sound roadmap to a quality product. It is compatible with both waterfall and frameworks, but standards like this are seldom followed or required.
 
At the time of this writing software development is regulated in only a few domains such as medical devices, pharmaceutical, financial, nuclear systems, automotive, and avionic sectors. outside of those domains, software development is comparable to the wild west. 
 
In almost every industry where billions of dollars are spent, there is regulation and standards. Standards are documented and armada law. Those that step outside of those standards are not considered professionals. They can even be held responsible and punished for their Miss deeds. For example in the medical profession, an entire industry has been built on the concept of medical malpractice. Doctors have an oath that says that they will do no harm. When they do harm, there are consequences for that doctor. Accountants must use double entry accounting. Accounting errors introduced by accountants have consequences for that accountant. Construction workers must adhere to government standards and codes before the House or building can pass inspections and be inhabited. What I'm trying to say is that all these industries have standards and rules and people, more or less, follow these rules because they know that they are the right thing to do.

The software industry has never had any such standards. Maybe it's still too new, but software developers are allowed to build systems that may or may not be sound. Software can literally kill people in the right context. More software can cost businesses billions of dollars. Other software can completely ruin and destroy businesses. Isn't it strange that the software industry is not held to any kind of standards or regulation?

No one likes regulation and rules especially when people can experience so much creative freedom. I started programming when I was eight years old. I made my first money making software at age 14. I could have never done that, if the creation of software was governed by rules and regulations. Kids around the world are able to throw together applications and get their app into the mobile App Store. It's incredible and a lot of fun.

Since there are no universally excepted standards and since there is no government regulation, the software industry is highly fragmented. There are those who value speed so much that quality is unknown and something that we don't really care about. On the other side there are those that care so much about quality that a piece of software may never reach the market because of drastic delays caused by over engineering. And in the middle, there are thousands of software development professionals who are doing the very best they can to try to meet both demand. But since there are no universally excepted standards, there's nothing that ties developers together on a common goal of reasonable speed and reasonable quality.

There are a few strong voices crying out in the wilderness, and what they say could be used as standards easily. But they are preaching to the choir or really. Software developers understand what it takes to get the job done right. But even with such influential voices, their words, methods, principles, and practices are rarely heated as a viable standards.
